American political party (1792–1824)
For other uses of "Democratic Republican", see
Democratic Republican Party

Democratic-Republican Party
, known at the time as the
Republican Party
(also referred to by historians as the
Jeffersonian Republican Party

American political party

Thomas Jefferson

in the early 1790s. It championed

, individual liberty, equal rights, separation of church and state, freedom of religion, anti-clericalism, emancipation of religious minorities,
decentralization
, free markets, free trade, and

. In foreign policy, it was hostile to Great Britain and in sympathy with the
French Revolution

. The party became increasingly dominant after the

Federalist Party

Increasing dominance over American politics led to increasing factional splits within the party.

John Taylor of Caroline

John Randolph of Roanoke
, believed that the administrations of Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe—and the Congresses led by

—had in some ways betrayed the republican "
Principles of '98
" by expanding the size and scope of the national government. The Republicans splintered during the
1824 presidential election
. Those calling for a return to the older founding principles of the party were often referred to as "Democratic Republicans" (later

) while those embracing the newer nationalist principles of "
The American System
" were often referred to as
National Republicans

The Republican Party originated in

to oppose the nationalist and economically interventionist policies of
Alexander Hamilton

Secretary of the Treasury

George Washington
. The Republicans and the opposing
Federalist Party
each became more cohesive during Washington's second term, partly as a result of the debate over the

. Though he was defeated by Federalist

1796 presidential election
, Jefferson and his Republican allies came into power following the 1800 elections. As president, Jefferson presided over a reduction in the national debt and government spending, and completed the
Louisiana Purchase

Madison succeeded Jefferson as president in 1809 and led the country during the largely inconclusive

. After the war, Madison and his congressional allies established the
Second Bank of the United States
and implemented protective

, marking a move away from the party's earlier emphasis on

and a strict construction of the
United States Constitution
. The Federalists collapsed after 1815, beginning a period known as the
Era of Good Feelings
. Lacking an effective opposition, the Republicans split into rival groups after the
1824 presidential election
: one faction supported President
John Quincy Adams
and became known as the
National Republican Party
which later merged into the

, while another faction, one that believed in
Jeffersonian democracy
, backed General

Democratic Party

Republicans were deeply committed to the principles of republicanism, which they feared were threatened by the aristocratic tendencies of the Federalists. During the 1790s, the party strongly opposed Federalist programs, including the

. After the War of 1812, Madison and many other party leaders came to accept the need for a national bank and federally funded infrastructure projects. In foreign affairs, the party advocated western expansion and tended to favor France over Britain, though the party's pro-French stance faded after

took power. The Democratic-Republicans were strongest in the

western frontier
, and weakest in

Founding, 1789–1796
Further information:
Presidency of George Washington

Anti-Administration party

First Party System
Thomas Jefferson
, 3rd president of the United States (1801–1809)

, 4th president of the United States (1809–1817)

1788–89 presidential election
, the first such election following the ratification of the
United States Constitution

George Washington
won the votes of every member of the
Electoral College

His unanimous victory in part reflected the fact that no formal
political parties
had formed at the national level in the

prior to 1789, though the country had been broadly polarized between the

, who supported ratification of the Constitution, and the
Anti-Federalists
, who opposed ratification.
Washington selected
Thomas Jefferson

Secretary of State

Alexander Hamilton

Secretary of the Treasury

and he relied on

as a key adviser and ally in Congress.
Hamilton implemented an expansive economic program, establishing the
First Bank of the United States

and convincing Congress to
assume the debts
of state governments.
Hamilton pursued his programs in the belief that they would foster a prosperous and stable country.
His policies engendered an opposition, chiefly concentrated in the
Southern United States
, that objected to Hamilton's

and accused him of unduly favoring well-connected wealthy Northern merchants and speculators. Madison emerged as the leader of the congressional opposition while Jefferson, who declined to publicly criticize Hamilton while both served in Washington's Cabinet, worked behind the scenes to stymie Hamilton's programs.
Jefferson and Madison, leading an
Anti-Administration group
, established the
National Gazette
, a newspaper which recast national politics not as a battle between Federalists and Anti-Federalists, but as a debate between aristocrats and republicans.

, Washington effectively ran unopposed for president, but Jefferson and Madison backed New York Governor

's unsuccessful attempt to unseat Vice President

Political leaders on both sides were reluctant to label their respective faction as a political party, but distinct and consistent voting blocs emerged in Congress by the end of 1793. Jefferson's followers became known as the Republicans (or sometimes as the Democratic-Republicans)
and Hamilton's followers (the Pro-Administration group) became the

While economic policies were the original motivating factor in the growing partisan split, foreign policy became even more important as war broke out between

(favored by Federalists) and

, which Republicans favored until 1799.
Partisan tensions escalated as a result of the
Whiskey Rebellion
and Washington's subsequent denunciation of the
Democratic-Republican Societies
, a type of new local political societies that favored democracy and generally supported the Jeffersonian position.
Historians use the term "Democratic-Republican" to describe these new organizations, but that name was rarely used at the time. They usually called themselves "Democratic", "Republican", "True Republican", "Constitutional", "United Freeman", "Patriotic", "Political", "Franklin", or "Madisonian".
The ratification of the

with Britain further inflamed partisan warfare, resulting in a hardening of the divisions between the Federalists and the Republicans.
By 1795–96, election campaigns—federal, state and local—were waged primarily along partisan lines between the two national parties, although local issues continued to affect elections, and party affiliations remained in flux.
As Washington declined to seek a third term, the
1796 presidential election
became the first contested president election. Having retired from Washington's Cabinet in 1793, Jefferson had left the leadership of the Democratic-Republicans in Madison's hands. Nonetheless, the Democratic-Republican
congressional nominating caucus
chose Jefferson as the party's presidential nominee, in the belief that he would be the party's strongest candidate; the caucus chose Senator

of New York as Jefferson's running mate.
Meanwhile, an informal caucus of Federalist leaders nominated a ticket of John Adams and

Though the candidates themselves largely stayed out of the fray, supporters of the candidates waged an active campaign; Federalists attacked Jefferson as a

, while the Democratic-Republicans accused Adams of being an anglophile and a

Ultimately, Adams won the presidency by a narrow margin, garnering 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson, who became the vice president.
Adams and the Revolution of 1800
Further information:
Presidency of John Adams

1800 United States presidential election

, outraged the American public and led to the

, an undeclared naval war between France and the United States. The Federalist-controlled Congress passed measures to expand the
American military
and also pushed through the
. These acts restricted speech critical of the government while also implementing stricter naturalization requirements.
Meanwhile, Jefferson and Madison drafted the
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
, which held that state legislatures could determine the constitutionality of federal laws.

1800 presidential election
, the Democratic-Republicans once again nominated a ticket of Jefferson and Burr. Shortly after a Federalist caucus re-nominated President Adams on a ticket with
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
, Adams dismissed two Hamilton allies from his Cabinet, leading to an open break between the two key figures in the Federalist Party.
Though the Federalist Party united against Jefferson's candidacy and waged an effective campaign in many states, the Democratic-Republicans won the election by winning most Southern electoral votes and carrying the crucial state of New York.
A significant element in the party's success in New York City, Philadelphia, Baltimore and other east-coast cities were

exiles, and other
Irish immigrants
, whom the Federalists regarded with distinct suspicion.

who in his newspaper, the
Philadelphia Aurora
, exposed the details of the

, by means of which the Federalist-controlled Congress sought to establish a closed-door Grand Committee with powers to disqualify
College electors

Adams was to name Duane one of the three or four men most responsible for his eventual defeat.
Jefferson and Burr both finished with 73 electoral votes, more than Adams or Pinckney, necessitating a contingent election between Jefferson and Burr in the House of Representatives.
Burr declined to take his name out of consideration, and the House deadlocked as most Democratic-Republican congressmen voted for Jefferson and most Federalists voted for Burr. Preferring Jefferson to Burr, Hamilton helped engineer Jefferson's election on the 36th ballot of the contingent election.
Jefferson would later describe the 1800 election, which also saw Democratic-Republicans gain control of Congress, as the "Revolution of 1800", writing that it was "as real of a revolution in the principles of our government as that of [1776] was in its form."
In the final months of his presidency, Adams reached an agreement with France to end the Quasi-War
and appointed several Federalist judges, including Chief Justice

Ideology played a central role with a Jeffersonian "left" supporting the French Revolution, versus a Federalist "right" opposing it.
You who are for French notions of government; for the tempestuous sea of anarchy and misrule; for arming the poor against the rich; for fraternizing with the foes of God and man; go to the left and support the leaders, or dupes of the anti-federal junto. But you that are sober, industrious, thriving, and happy, give your votes for those men who mean to preserve the union of the states, the purity and vigor of our excellent constitution, the sacred majesty of the laws, and the holy ordinances of religion.
Jefferson's presidency, 1801–1809
Further information:
Presidency of Thomas Jefferson
Despite the intensity of the 1800 election, the transition of power from the Federalists to the Democratic-Republicans was peaceful.
In his inaugural address, Jefferson indicated that he would seek to reverse many Federalist policies, but he also emphasized reconciliation, noting that "every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle".
He appointed a geographically balanced and ideologically moderate Cabinet that included Madison as Secretary of State and

as Secretary of the Treasury; Federalists were excluded from the Cabinet, but Jefferson appointed some prominent Federalists and allowed many other Federalists to keep their positions.
Gallatin persuaded Jefferson to retain the First Bank of the United States, a major part of the Hamiltonian program, but other Federalist policies were scrapped.
Jefferson and his Democratic-Republican allies eliminated the whiskey excise and other taxes,
shrank the army and the navy,
With the repeal of Federalist laws and programs, many Americans had little contact with the federal government in their daily lives, with the exception of the

Partly as a result of these spending cuts, Jefferson lowered the national debt from $83 million to $57 million between 1801 and 1809.
Though he was largely able to reverse Federalist policies, Federalists retained a bastion of power on the Supreme Court;

rulings continued to reflect Federalist ideals until Chief Justice Marshall's death in the 1830s.
In the Supreme Court case of
Marbury v. Madison
, the Marshall Court established the power of

, through which the

had the final word on the constitutionality of federal laws.
By the time Jefferson took office, Americans had settled as far west as the
Mississippi River

Many in the United States, particularly those in the west, favored further territorial expansion, and especially hoped to annex the Spanish province of

In early 1803, Jefferson dispatched

to France to join ambassador
Robert Livingston
on a diplomatic mission to purchase New Orleans.
To the surprise of the American delegation, Napoleon offered to sell the entire territory of Louisiana for $15 million.
After Secretary of State James Madison gave his assurances that the purchase was well within even the strictest interpretation of the Constitution, the

quickly ratified the treaty, and the House immediately authorized funding.
The Louisiana Purchase nearly doubled the size of the United States, and Treasury Secretary Gallatin was forced to borrow from foreign banks to finance the payment to France.
Though the Louisiana Purchase was widely popular, some Federalists criticized it; Congressman

By 1804, Vice President Burr had thoroughly alienated Jefferson, and the Democratic-Republican presidential nominating caucus chose George Clinton as Jefferson's running mate for the
1804 presidential election
. That same year, Burr challenged Hamilton to a

after taking offense to a comment allegedly made by Hamilton; Hamilton died in the subsequent duel. Bolstered by a superior party organization, Jefferson won the 1804 election in a landslide over Federalist candidate Charles Cotesworth Pinckney.

British government

Orders in Council
, which called for a blockade on French-controlled ports.
In response to subsequent British and French searches of American shipping, the Jefferson administration passed the
Embargo Act of 1807
, which cut off American trade with Europe.
The embargo proved unpopular and difficult to enforce, especially in Federalist-leaning

, and expired at the end of Jefferson's second term.
Jefferson declined to seek a third term in the
1808 presidential election
, but helped Madison triumph over George Clinton and James Monroe at the party's congressional nominating caucus. Madison won the general election in a landslide over Pinckney.
Madison's presidency, 1809–1817
Further information:
Presidency of James Madison

As attacks on American shipping continued after Madison took office, both Madison and the broader American public moved towards war.
Public resentment towards Britain led to the election of a new generation of Democratic-Republican leaders, including

, who championed high

, federally funded
internal improvements
and a jingoistic attitude towards Britain.
On June 1, 1812, Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war.
The declaration was passed largely along sectional and party lines, with intense opposition coming from the Federalists and some other congressmen from the Northeast.
For many who favored war, national honor was at stake;
John Quincy Adams
wrote that the only alternative to war was "the abandonment of our right as an independent nation."
George Clinton's nephew,

, challenged Madison in the
1812 presidential election
. Though Clinton assembled a formidable coalition of Federalists and anti-Madison Democratic-Republicans, Madison won a close election.
Madison initially hoped for a quick end to the

, but the war got off to a disastrous start as multiple American invasions of

The United States had more military success in 1813, and American troops under
William Henry Harrison

Tecumseh's confederacy

Battle of the Thames
in 1814, crushing Indian resistance to

. Britain shifted troops to North America in 1814 following Napoleon's abdication, and British forces
captured and burnt Washington

In early 1815, Madison learned that his negotiators in Europe had signed the

, ending the war without major concessions by either side.
Though it had no effect on the treaty,

's victory in the January 1815
Battle of New Orleans
ended the war on a triumphant note.
Napoleon's defeat at the
Battle of Waterloo
in June 1815 brought a final end to the Napoleonic Wars and European interference with American shipping.
With Americans celebrating a successful "second war of independence", the Federalist Party slid towards national irrelevance.
The subsequent period of virtually one-party rule by the Democratic-Republican Party is known as the "
Era of Good Feelings

In his first term, Madison and his allies had largely hewed to Jefferson's domestic agenda of low taxes and a reduction of the national debt, and Congress allowed the national bank's charter to expire during Madison's first term.
The challenges of the War of 1812 led many Democratic-Republicans to reconsider the role of the federal government.

convened in December 1815, Madison proposed the re-establishment of the national bank, increased spending on the army and the navy, and a tariff designed to

American goods from foreign competition. Madison's proposals were strongly criticized by strict constructionists like

, who argued that Madison's program "out-Hamiltons Alexander Hamilton."
Responding to Madison's proposals, the 14th Congress compiled one of the most productive legislative records up to that point in history, enacting the

and establishing the
Second Bank of the United States

At the party's 1816
congressional nominating caucus
, Secretary of State James Monroe defeated Secretary of War
William H. Crawford
in a 65-to-54 vote.
The Federalists offered little opposition in the
1816 presidential election
and Monroe won in a landslide election.
Monroe and Era of Good Feelings, 1817–1825
Further information:
Presidency of James Monroe
Monroe believed that the existence of political parties was harmful to the United States,
and he sought to usher in the end of the Federalist Party by avoiding divisive policies and welcoming ex-Federalists into the fold.
Monroe favored infrastructure projects to promote economic development and, despite some constitutional concerns, signed bills providing federal funding for the

and other projects.
Partly due to the mismanagement of national bank president

, the country experienced a prolonged economic recession known as the

that would influence national politics long after the recession ended.
Despite the ongoing economic troubles, the Federalists failed to field a serious challenger to Monroe in the
1820 presidential election
, and Monroe won re-election essentially unopposed.
During the proceedings over the admission of
Missouri Territory
as a state, Congressman
James Tallmadge, Jr.
of New York "tossed a bombshell into the Era of Good Feelings" by proposing amendments providing for the eventual exclusion of slavery from Missouri.
The amendments sparked the first major national

debate since the ratification of the Constitution,
and instantly exposed the

polarization over the issue of slavery.
Northern Democratic-Republicans formed a coalition across partisan lines with the remnants of the Federalist Party in support of the amendments, while Southern Democratic-Republicans were almost unanimously against such the restrictions.
In February 1820, Congressman

, in which Missouri would be admitted as a slave state, but slavery would be excluded in the remaining

parallel 36°30′ north

A bill based on Thomas's proposal became law in April 1820.
By 1824, the Federalist Party had largely collapsed as a national party, and the
1824 presidential election
was waged by competing members of the Democratic-Republican Party.
The party's congressional nominating caucus was largely ignored, and candidates were instead nominated by state legislatures.
Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, former Speaker of the House Henry Clay, Secretary of the Treasury William Crawford, and General

emerged as the major candidates in the election.
The regional strength of each candidate played an important role in the election; Adams was popular in New England, Clay and Jackson were strong in the West, and Jackson and Crawford competed for the South.
As no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote in the 1824 election, the House of Representatives held a
contingent election
to determine the president.
Clay personally disliked Adams but nonetheless supported him in the contingent election over Crawford, who opposed Clay's nationalist policies, and Jackson, whom Clay viewed as a potential tyrant.
With Clay's backing, Adams won the contingent election.
After Clay accepted appointment as Secretary of State, Jackson's supporters claimed that Adams and Clay had reached a "

" in which Adams promised Clay the appointment in return for Clay's support in the contingent election.
Jackson, who was deeply angered by the result of the contingent election, returned to Tennessee, where the state legislature quickly nominated him for president in the

Final years, 1825–1829
Further information:
Presidency of John Quincy Adams
Adams shared Monroe's goal of ending partisan conflict, and his Cabinet included individuals of various ideological and regional backgrounds.
In his 1825 annual message to Congress, Adams presented a comprehensive and ambitious agenda, calling for major investments in internal improvements as well as the creation of a national university, a naval academy, and a national astronomical observatory.
His requests to Congress galvanized the opposition, spurring the creation of an anti-Adams congressional coalition consisting of supporters of Jackson, Crawford, and Vice President Calhoun.
Following the 1826 elections, Calhoun and
Martin Van Buren
(who brought along many of Crawford's supporters) agreed to throw their support behind Jackson in the

In the press, the two major political factions were referred to as "Adams Men" and "Jackson Men".

formed an effective party apparatus that adopted many modern campaign techniques and emphasized Jackson's popularity and the supposed corruption of Adams and the federal government.
Though Jackson did not articulate a detailed political platform in the same way that Adams did, his coalition was united in opposition to Adams's reliance on government planning and tended to favor the opening of

lands to white settlement.
Ultimately, Jackson won 178 of the 261 electoral votes and just under 56 percent of the popular vote.
Jackson won 50.3 percent of the popular vote in the free states and 72.6 percent of the vote in the slave states.
The election marked the permanent end of the Era of Good Feelings and the start of the
Second Party System
. The dream of non-partisan politics, shared by Monroe, Adams, and many earlier leaders, was shattered, replaced with Van Buren's ideal of partisan battles between legitimated political parties.
Origins of party name
In the 1790s, political parties were new in the United States and people were not accustomed to having formal names for them. There was no single official name for the Democratic-Republican Party, but party members generally called themselves Republicans and voted for what they called the "Republican party", "republican ticket" or "republican interest".
Jefferson and Madison often used the terms "republican" and "Republican party" in their letters.

and the opposition to corruption, elitism, aristocracy and monarchy.
The term "Democratic-Republican" was used by contemporaries only occasionally,
but is used by modern political scientists.
Historians often refer to the "Jeffersonian Republicans".
The term "Democratic Party" was first used pejoratively by Federalist opponents.
Historians argue that the party died out before the present-day
Democratic Party
was formed. However, since the days of Franklin Roosevelt, Democratic politicians have proudly claimed Jefferson as their founder.

Further information:
Jeffersonian democracy

Thomas Jefferson §
Political, social and religious views
The Democratic-Republican Party saw itself as a champion of republicanism and denounced the Federalists as supporters of monarchy and aristocracy.
Ralph Brown writes that the party was marked by a "commitment to broad principles of personal liberty, social mobility, and westward expansion."
Political scientist James A. Reichley writes that "the issue that most sharply divided the Jeffersonians from the Federalists was not states rights, nor the national debt, nor the national Bank... but the question of social equality."
In a world in which few believed in democracy or egalitarianism, Jefferson's belief in political equality stood out from many of the other leaders who held that the wealthy should lead society. His opponents, says Susan Dunn
, warned that Jefferson's "Republicans would turn America upside down, permitting the

to govern the nation and unseating the wealthy social elite, long accustomed to wielding political power and governing the nation."
Jefferson advocated a philosophy that historians call
Jeffersonian democracy
, which was marked by his belief in

strict limits on the national government

Influenced by the Jeffersonian belief in equality, by 1824 all but three states had removed property-owning requirements for voting.
Though open to some redistributive measures, Jefferson saw a strong centralized government as a threat to freedom.
Jefferson was especially averse to a national debt, which he believed to be inherently dangerous and immoral.
After the party took power in 1800, Jefferson became increasingly concerned about foreign intervention and more open to programs of economic development conducted by the federal government. In an effort to promote economic growth and the development of a diversified economy, Jefferson's Democratic-Republican successors would oversee the construction of numerous federally funded infrastructure projects and implement protective tariffs.
While economic policies were the original catalyst to the partisan split between the Democratic-Republicans and the Federalists, foreign policy was also a major factor that divided the parties. Most Americans supported the French Revolution prior to the
Execution of Louis XVI
in 1793, but Federalists began to fear the radical egalitarianism of the revolution as it became increasingly violent.
Jefferson and other Democratic-Republicans defended the French Revolution

ascended to power.
Democratic-Republican foreign policy was marked by support for expansionism, as Jefferson championed the concept of an "
Empire of Liberty
" that centered on the acquisition and settlement of western territories.
Under Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe, the United States completed the Louisiana Purchase, acquired

, and reached a treaty with Britain providing for shared sovereignty over

In 1823, the Monroe administration promulgated the

, which reiterated the traditional
U.S. policy of neutrality
with regard to European wars and conflicts, but declared that the United States would not accept the recolonization of any country by its former European master.

From the foundation of the party, slavery divided the Democratic-Republicans. Many Southern Democratic-Republicans, especially from the Deep South, defended the institution. Jefferson and many other Democratic-Republicans from Virginia held an ambivalent view on slavery; Jefferson believed it was an immoral institution, but he opposed the immediate emancipation of all slaves on social and economic grounds. Instead, he favored gradual phasing out of the institution.
Meanwhile, Northern Democratic-Republicans often took stronger anti-slavery positions than their Federalist counterparts, supporting measures like the abolition of slavery in Washington. In 1807, with President Jefferson's support, Congress

international slave trade
, doing so at the earliest possible date allowed by the Constitution.
After the War of 1812, Southerners increasingly came to view slavery as a beneficial institution rather than an unfortunate economic necessity, further polarizing the party over the issue.

Republican Party

Some Democratic-Republicans from the border states, including

, continued to adhere to the Jeffersonian view of slavery as a necessary evil; many of these leaders joined the
American Colonization Society
, which proposed the voluntary recolonization of Africa as part of a broader plan for the gradual emancipation of slaves.

Madison and Jefferson formed the Democratic-Republican Party from a combination of former Anti-Federalists and supporters of the Constitution who were dissatisfied with the Washington administration's policies.
Nationwide, Democratic-Republicans were strongest in the South, and many of party's leaders were wealthy Southern slaveowners. The Democratic-Republicans also attracted middle class Northerners, such as artisans, farmers, and lower-level merchants, who were eager to challenge the power of the local elite.
Every state had a distinct political geography that shaped party membership; in Pennsylvania, the Republicans were weakest around

and strongest in

settlements in the west.
The Federalists had broad support in New England, but in other places they relied on wealthy merchants and landowners.
After 1800, the Federalists collapsed in the South and West, though the party remained competitive in New England and in some

writes that, after assuming power in 1801, the Democratic-Republicans began to factionalize into three main groups: moderates, radicals, and

The Old Republicans, led by

, were a loose group of influential Southern plantation owners who strongly favored states' rights and denounced any form of compromise with the Federalists. The radicals consisted of a wide array of individuals from different sections of the country who were characterized by their support for far-reaching political and economic reforms; prominent radicals include

, who jointly led a powerful
political machine
in Philadelphia. The moderate faction consisted of many former supporters of the ratification of the Constitution, including James Madison, who were more accepting of Federalist economic programs and sought conciliation with moderate Federalists.
After 1810, a younger group of nationalist Democratic-Republicans, led by Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, rose to prominence. These nationalists favored federally funded internal improvements and high tariffs, positions that would form the basis for Clay's

In addition to its base among the leaders of Clay and Calhoun's generation, nationalist policies also proved attractive to many older Democratic-Republicans, including James Monroe.
The Panic of 1819 sparked a backlash against nationalist policies, and many of those opposed to the nationalist policies rallied around William H. Crawford until he had a major stroke in 1823.
After the 1824 election, most of Crawford's followers, including Martin Van Buren, gravitated to Andrew Jackson, forming a major part of the coalition that propelled Jackson to victory in the 1828 election.
Organizational strategy
The Democratic-Republican Party invented campaign and organizational techniques that were later adopted by the Federalists and became standard American practice. It was especially effective in building a network of

, a leading Federalist, used the term "

" to link members of Jefferson's party to the radicals of the
French Revolution
. He blamed the newspapers for electing Jefferson and wrote they were "an overmatch for any Government.... The Jacobins owe their triumph to the unceasing use of this engine; not so much to skill in use of it as by repetition".

and Jefferson himself.
Just as important was effective party organization of the sort that

pioneered. In 1796, he managed the Jefferson campaign in Pennsylvania, blanketing the state with agents who passed out 30,000 hand-written tickets, naming all 15 electors (printed tickets were not allowed). Beckley told one agent: "In a few days a select republican friend from the City will call upon you with a parcel of tickets to be distributed in your County. Any assistance and advice you can furnish him with, as to suitable districts & characters, will I am sure be rendered". Beckley was the first American professional campaign manager and his techniques were quickly adopted in other states.
The emergence of the new organizational strategies can be seen in the politics of

around 1806, which have been well documented by Cunningham. The Federalists dominated Connecticut, so the Republicans had to work harder to win. In 1806, the state leadership sent town leaders instructions for the forthcoming elections. Every town manager was told by state leaders "to appoint a district manager in each district or section of his town, obtaining from each an assurance that he will faithfully do his duty". Then the town manager was instructed to compile lists and total the number of taxpayers and the number of eligible voters, find out how many favored the Republicans and how many the Federalists and to count the number of supporters of each party who were not eligible to vote but who might qualify (by age or taxes) at the next election. These highly detailed returns were to be sent to the county manager and in turn were compiled and sent to the state manager. Using these lists of potential voters, the managers were told to get all eligible people to town meetings and help the young men qualify to vote. The state manager was responsible for supplying party newspapers to each town for distribution by town and district managers.
This highly coordinated "
get-out-the-vote
" drive would be familiar to future political campaigners, but was the first of its kind in world history.

Further information:
Second Party System

Thomas Jefferson §

The Federalists collapsed after 1815, beginning a period known as the
Era of Good Feelings

1824 presidential election
the Democratic-Republicans split into factions. The coalition of Jacksonians, Calhounites, and Crawfordites built by

Martin Van Buren
coalesced into the
Democratic Party
, which dominated presidential politics in the decades prior to the Civil War. Supporters of
John Quincy Adams

would form the main opposition to Jackson as the
National Republican Party
, which in turn eventually formed part of the

, which was the second major party in the United States between the 1830s and the early 1850s.
The diverse and changing nature of the Democratic-Republican Party allowed both major parties to claim that they stood for Jeffersonian principles.

Daniel Walker Howe
writes that Democrats traced their heritage to the "Old Republicanism of

", while the Whigs looked to "the new Republican nationalism of

The Whig Party fell apart in the 1850s due to divisions over the expansion of slavery into new territories. The modern
Republican Party
was formed in 1854 to oppose the expansion of slavery, and many former Whig Party leaders joined the newly formed anti-slavery party.
The Republican Party sought to combine Jefferson and Jackson's ideals of liberty and equality with Clay's program of using an active government to modernize the economy.
The Democratic-Republican Party inspired the name of its two direct descedants or offshoots: the National Republican Party (Whigs) and the Democratic party, as well as the later newly created Republican Party.
Fear of a large debt is a major legacy of this party. Andrew Jackson believed the national debt was a "national curse" and he took special pride in paying off the entire national debt in 1835.
Politicians ever since have used the issue of a high national debt to denounce the other party for profligacy and a threat to fiscal soundness and the nation's future.
Electoral history
Presidential elections

List of Democratic-Republican Party presidential tickets

In his first presidential run, Jefferson did not win the presidency, and Burr did not win the vice presidency. However, under the pre-

election rules, Jefferson won the vice presidency due to dissension among Federalist electors.

In their second presidential run, Jefferson and Burr received the same number of electoral votes. Jefferson was subsequently chosen as President by the House of Representatives.

While commonly labeled as the Federalist candidate, Clinton technically ran as a Democratic-Republican and was not nominated by the Federalist party itself, the latter simply deciding not to field a candidate. This did not prevent endorsements from state Federalist parties (such as in Pennsylvania), but he received the endorsement from the New York state Democratic-Republicans as well.

William H. Crawford

were nominated for president and vice-president by a group of 66 Congressmen that called itself the "Democratic members of Congress".
Gallatin later withdrew from the contest.

John Quincy Adams

ran as Republicans, although they were not nominated by any national body. While Jackson won a plurality in the electoral college and popular vote, he did not win the constitutionally required majority of electoral votes to be elected president. The contest was thrown to the House of Representatives, where Adams won with Clay's support. The electoral college chose

for vice president.
Congressional representation

Party divisions of United States Congresses
The affiliation of many Congressmen in the earliest years is an assignment by later historians. The parties were slowly coalescing groups; at first there were many independents. Cunningham noted that only about a quarter of the House of Representatives up until 1794 voted with Madison as much as two-thirds of the time and another quarter against him two-thirds of the time, leaving almost half as fairly independent.

American Enlightenment

History of the Democratic Party (United States)
History of U.S. foreign policy, 1801–1829
Jacksonian democracy
List of political parties in the United States
Explanatory notes

Party members generally referred to it as the Republican Party; although the word

is not to be confused with the modern
Republican Party founded in the 1850s
. To distinguish this party from the current Republican Party, political scientists usually use the term "Democratic-Republican".

Prior to the ratification of the
Twelfth Amendment
in 1804, each member of the Electoral College cast two votes, with no distinction made between electoral votes for president and electoral votes for

. Under these rules, an individual who received more votes than any other candidate, and received votes from a majority of the electors, was elected as president. If neither of those conditions were met, the House of Representatives would select the president through a contingent election in which each state delegation received one vote. After the selection of the president, the individual who finished with the most votes was elected as vice president, with the Senate holding a contingent election in the case of a tie.

Clay himself was not eligible in the contingent election because the House could only choose from the top-three candidates in the electoral vote tally. Clay finished a close fourth to Crawford in the electoral vote.

"In 1992, the Democratic Party of the United States will celebrate the 200th anniversary of its establishment on May 13, 1792... Thomas Jefferson founded the first political party in the United States, the Democratic Party, which was originally known as the Republican Party."

According to  Peter R. Henriques, "The original Republican party, represented by Jefferson and James Madison, evolved into the modern Democratic organization. Federalists tilted to the right; Republicans, to the left."   Henriques, "1800: America’s First Explosive Election,"

Bordewich (2016)

The Aurora General Advertiser
(Philadelphia), April. 30, 1795, p. 3;
New Hampshire Gazette
(Portsmouth), October 15, 1796, p. 3;
Claypoole's American Daily Advertiser
(Philadelphia), October 10, 1797, p. 3;
Columbian Centinel
(Boston), September 15, 1798, p. 2;
Alexandria (VA) Times
, October 8, 1798, p. 2;
Daily Advertiser
(New York), September 22, 1800, p. 2 & November 25, 1800, p. 2;
The Oracle of Dauphin
(Harrisburg), October 6, 1800, p. 3;

(Baltimore), October 23, 1800, p. 3;

(New York), October 25, 1800, p. 3;
Poulson's American Daily Advertiser
(Philadelphia), November 19, 1800, p. 3;
Windham (CT) Herald
, November 20, 1800, p. 2;

(Charleston), November 22, 1800, p. 2;
The American Mercury
(Hartford), November 27, 1800, p. 3; and
Constitutional Telegraphe
(Boston), November 29, 1800, p. 3.
After 1802, some local organizations slowly began merging "Democratic" into their own name and became known as the "Democratic Republicans". Examples include

, pp. 299–302, 309–311

Foner found only two that used the actual term "Democratic-Republican", including the "Democratic-Republican Society of Dumfries", Virginia, 1794. Philip S. Foner,
The Democratic-Republican Societies, 1790-1800: A Documentary Source-book of Constitutions, Declarations, Addresses, Resolutions, and Toasts
(1977) pp 350, 370.

, pp. 323–328, 338–344

Office of the Historian, Department of  State. "The United States and the French Revolution, 1789–1799"  (2017)

Henriques, "1800: America’s First Explosive Election,"

Appleby, 2003, pp. 65–69

Appleby, 2003, pp. 7–8, 61–63

James Madison: The Founding Father

Cunningham (1996)

Cunningham (1996)

Cunningham (1996)

209–210, 251–252.

Cunningham (1996)

376: "[T]he sectional divisions among the Jeffersonian Republicans...offers historical paradoxes...in which hard-line slaveholding Southern Republicans rejected the egalitarian ideals of the slaveholder [Thomas] Jefferson while the antislavery Northern Republicans upheld them – even as Jefferson himself supported slavery's expansion on purportedly antislavery grounds.

Cunningham (1996)

Cunningham (1996)

For examples of original quotes and documents from various states, see Cunningham, Noble E.,
Jeffersonian Republicans: The Formation of Party Organization: 1789–1801
(1957), pp. 48, 63–66, 97, 99, 103, 110, 111, 112, 144, 151, 153, 156, 157, 161, 163, 188, 196, 201, 204, 213, 218 and 234.

Address of the Republican committee of the County of Gloucester, New-Jersey

October 21, 2017, at the

", Gloucester County, December 15, 1800.

Jefferson used the term "republican party" in a letter to Washington in May 1792 to refer to those in Congress who were his allies and who supported the existing republican constitution.
At a conference with Washington a year later, Jefferson referred to "what is called the republican party here". Bergh, ed.
Writings of Thomas Jefferson
(1907) 1:385, 8:345

"I see by a paper of last evening that even in New York a meeting of the people has taken place, at the instance of the Republican party, and that a committee is appointed for the like purpose." See also: Smith, 832.
"The party called republican is steadily for the support of the present constitution"

. "The people are now able every where to compare the principles and policy of those who have borne the name of Republicans or Democrats with the career of the adverse party and to see and feel that the former are as much in harmony with the Spirit of the Nation as the latter was at variance with both."

In a private letter in September 1798, George Washington wrote, "You could as soon as scrub the blackamore white, as to change the principles of a profest Democrat; and that he will leave nothing unattempted to overturn the Government of this Country."

ISBN / Date incompatibility (

James Roger Sharp,
American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis

Jefferson's second revolution: the election crisis of 1800 and the triumph of republicanism
(HMH, 2004) p 1.

Jeffrey L. Pasley.
"The Tyranny of Printers": Newspaper Politics in the Early American Republic

Cunningham (1957)

Cunningham (1963), 129.

Gould (2003), p. 14.

Cunningham (1957)

ISBN / Date incompatibility (

concerns the party founded in 1854.

Beard, Charles A.
Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy

Brown, Stuart Gerry.
The First Republicans: Political Philosophy and Public Policy in the Party of Jefferson and Madison

Chambers, Wiliam Nisbet.
Political Parties in a New Nation: The American Experience, 1776–1809

The Other Founders: Anti-Federalism and the Dissenting Tradition in America, 1788–1828

Cunningham, Noble E., Jr.
The Process of Government Under Jefferson

Dawson, Matthew Q.
Partisanship and the Birth of America's Second Party, 1796–1800: Stop the Wheels of Government.
Greenwood, 2000.
Dougherty, Keith L. "TRENDS: Creating Parties in Congress: The Emergence of a Social Network."
Political Research Quarterly
73.4 (2020): 759–773.

Elkins, Stanley M.
and Eric McKitrick.
The Age of Federalism
(1995), detailed political history of 1790s.

Adams Vs. Jefferson: The Tumultuous Election of 1800

Goodman, Paul, ed.
The Federalists vs. the Jeffersonian Republicans

, short excerpts by leading historians
Klein, Philip Shriver.
Pennsylvania Politics, 1817–1832: A Game without Rules

Onuf, Peter S., ed.
Jeffersonian Legacies.

Pasley, Jeffrey L. et al. eds.
Beyond the Founders: New Approaches to the Political History of the Early American Republic

Ray, Kristofer. "The Republicans Are the Nation? Thomas Jefferson, William Duane, and the Evolution of the Republican Coalition, 1809–1815."
American Nineteenth Century History
14.3 (2013): 283–304.
Risjord, Norman K.;
The Old Republicans: Southern Conservatism in the Age of Jefferson
(1965) on the Randolph faction.
Sharp, James Roger.
American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis
(1993) detailed narrative of 1790s.
Smelser, Marshall.
The Democratic Republic 1801–1815
(1968), survey of political history.
Van Buren, Martin. Van Buren, Abraham, Van Buren, John, ed.
Inquiry Into the Origin and Course of Political Parties in the United States

Wiltse, Charles Maurice.
The Jeffersonian Tradition in American Democracy

Henry Adams and the Making of America

Cunningham, Noble E.
In Pursuit of Reason The Life of Thomas Jefferson

Cunningham, Noble E., Jr. "John Beckley: An Early American Party Manager",
William and Mary Quarterly,
13 (January 1956), 40–52,

Alexander Hamilton: Portrait in Paradox
(1959), full-scale biography.

Peterson; Merrill D.
Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation: A Biography
(1975), full-scale biography.

Henry Clay: Statesman for the Union
(1991), a standard biography.
Rutland, Robert A., ed.
James Madison and the American Nation, 1751–1836: An Encyclopedia

Schachner, Nathan.
Aaron Burr: A Biography
(1961), full-scale biography.

The Last Founding Father: James Monroe and a Nation's Call to Greatness

Wiltse, Charles Maurice.
John C. Calhoun, Nationalist, 1782–1828

Beeman, Richard R.
The Old Dominion and the New Nation, 1788–1801
(1972), on Virginia politics.
Formisano, Ronald P.
The Transformation of Political Culture. Massachusetts Parties, 1790s–1840s

Gilpatrick, Delbert Harold.
Jeffersonian Democracy in North Carolina, 1789–1816

The Democratic-Republicans of Massachusetts

details the collapse state by state.

New Jersey's Jeffersonian Republicans: The Genesis of an Early Party Machine, 1789–1817

Risjord; Norman K.
Chesapeake Politics, 1781–1800
(1978) on Virginia and Maryland.
Young, Alfred F.
The Democratic Republicans of New York: The Origins, 1763–1797

Hale, Matthew Rainbow. "On their tiptoes: Political time and Newspapers during the Advent of the Radicalized French Revolution, circa 1792-1793."
Journal of the Early Republic
29.2 (2009): 191–218.

Humphrey, Carol Sue
The Press of the Young Republic, 1783–1833

Knudson, Jerry W.
Jefferson And the Press: Crucible of Liberty
(2006) how 4 Republican and 4 Federalist papers covered election of 1800; Thomas Paine; Louisiana Purchase; Hamilton-Burr duel; impeachment of Chase; and the embargo.
Laracey, Mel. "The presidential newspaper as an engine of early American political development: The case of Thomas Jefferson and the election of 1800."
Rhetoric & Public Affairs
11.1 (2008): 7-46.

Pasley, Jeffrey L. "The Two National" Gazettes": Newspapers and the Embodiment of American Political Parties."
Early American Literature
35.1 (2000): 51-86.

Pasley, Jeffrey L.
'The Tyranny of Printers': Newspaper Politics in the Early American Republic

Scherr, Arthur. " 'A Genuine Republican': Benjamin Franklin Bache's Remarks (1797), the Federalists, and Republican Civic Humanism."
Pennsylvania History
80.2 (2013): 243-298.

Stewart, Donald H.
The Opposition Press of the Federalist Era
(1968), highly detailed study of Republican newspapers.

The complete text, searchable, of all early American newspapers are

Adams, John Quincy.
Memoirs of John Quincy Adams: Comprising Portions of His Diary from 1795 to 1848

). Adams, son of the Federalist president, switched and became a Republican in 1808.
Cunningham, Noble E., Jr., ed.
The Making of the American Party System 1789 to 1809
(1965) excerpts from primary sources.
Cunningham, Noble E., Jr., ed.
Circular Letters of Congressmen to Their Constituents 1789–1829
(1978), 3 vol; reprints the political newsletters sent out by congressmen.
Kirk, Russell ed.
John Randolph of Roanoke: A study in American politics, with selected speeches and letters
, 4th ed., Liberty Fund, 1997, 588 pp.

; Randolph was a leader of the "Old Republican" faction.
McColley, Robert, ed.
Federalists, Republicans, and foreign entanglements, 1789-1815

, primary sources on foreign policy
Smith, James Morton, ed.
The Republic of Letters: The Correspondence of Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, 1776–1826
Volume 2 (1994).

A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787–1825
Democratic-Republican Party ideology over time